8/26/21

So i've been doing this for a few weeks now (i started the diary a few days after i wrote the first lines) and i've been reflecting on some things i've learned along the way. 

# really not happy where my career has landed
First, a bit of a digression. In my real life I'm an engineering manager. I didnt start out there, I first was a programmer (C and C++ on for desktop apps). THen I was a solutions architect and product manager. Then I ended up as an engineering manager for a small team. Being a manager is not for me. I love the people on my team but i have enough trouble dealing wiht my own issues and insecuritites. Having to be responsible for other people in addition to tht isn't much fun and i end up hiding and avoiding most of the things I think i really should be doing. (Its funny... I'm sort of the kind of manager I've always had myself and felt dissapointed by). I like to create. To make things. I like to do things myself. Its not as rewarding to convince others to do it. Maybe it's a control issue. Maybe I dont trust people to understand or see the vision the same way. I like exploring ideas, and throwing away code and thinging through possible solutions. I can clearly _picture_ the _feeling_ of the end result and i can see threads that could bring me there. work now is nothing like that, which is also part of the problem. 

# sad that this cant be my real job?
The problem with having your job so closely related to your hobby is that, while at least on the surface, it seems like a good thing, hobbies are liekly to be much more enjoyable. It's tempting to think that you could just do that instead.... so i'm kinda bummed that this isnt my real job. I dont really like my job right now and Ive had more fun doing this than anything i've done for work in the past few years. Though, while i would really love to, i know i cant do this as my job. Mostly I think i'm probably just burnt out at work and so if this were a job would it still be fun? There is no money here in indie game development. It can take years to get something to a point of completion where you _could_ make money and then the compitition is fierce. BUt that is OK. I dont think i really want this to be my job. I just wish my job was more like like this...

> Over the past two weeks I started on _my_ pandemic project !()[entry_1.md]. It's a little late in the pandemic, but other people have learned guitar, or cooking, or what ever. I've decided to dive back into game development. It started with just learning about using a feature of modern browsers called "Canvas" which gives you 2d or 3d functions to draw to a browser window. Its all HTML and javascript so it's super accessible and it also let me practice those skills more also. The game concept i went with was a Legend of Zelda style 2d, tile based kinda thing and has been a lot of fun in some surprising ways.

# the power of small increments
One of the most rewarding (and surpsing/refreshing) aspects of this game project is how I can regularly tick off so many "completed" things that _add_ to the overall game. I say "completed", but it's is a fact that for every completed thing i gone back and reworked/rewritten almost every line of code multiple times. Some people (especially the work types) would say i probably wasnt actually done for any of those. To me though, that's not what software products are supposed to do. They are supposed to be semi liquid and not frozen. Sure, at some point, you need to 'put the brush down' so to speak, but I like the idea of going back and reworking something in light of new ideas. For this project, I have a running list of 'todo' items that I revisit almost everyday - adding, removing, checking off as done. The todos themselves are not long winded "requirements" but instead they are short - a few words or a sentance. Sometimes it's clear what they are when I reread them later, othertimes its not. If i dont know what it is I just delete the line and move on. If it was important, I'm sure it will come back. When I'm looking for someting to do i just scan the list for something that seems interesting, or maybe is a prerequisit for something else. Each of the items is inherently small(ish) and so far has been something that I can complete over the course of a day or two. This has been working out surprisingly well. Sometimes, to do a thing, I might need to implement the skeleton of something else. There is a _mostly_ emergent priority for most things. As an example, my todo list included the item "quest system". That's it. Clearly not a lot of detail there... but I sort of understood the goal as 'give the player something to do'. The initial plan for the quest system had lots of potential prerequisites. So, _what_ should the player do then? When I decided to start work on that item i filled in the following detail: "You would talk to an NPC and that would activate the quest and the quest would end if the player had a special item". Just that simple thing has a lot going on - talking to NPCs, keeping track of quests, keeping track of items, and having NPCs be able to detect all of that and react appropriately. However, dispite all that, at the end of _one_ day I had enough done that I ticked off my 'implement quets' todo item. How did I get so much done?! Well...basically comes down to not doing things the way I would have been expected to at work. For this, it broke down into talking to NPCs  - they didnt say much - just "Hi", and "Are you done yet". Quests were clunky booleans inside the 'talk to npc' code - quest_started and quest_completed. The items needed to complete the quest were just an array of strings that had the "name" of an item. NPCs could detect if you had the item with access to global variables. It was all clunky and hard coded but it worked. More importantly, it let me explore the feature and was free to make mistakes/not be perfect because this was supposed to be "just enough". This is not how it would have gone at work. Each of those would need to be painstakingly planned and doucmented and implemented, one by one. Each one super complex, written to handle any and all situations we could possibly think of. Each one pretty much useless until all of them were complete. For me though the just enough was perfect and over the next few days, while tackeling other todo items, I significantly rewrote almost everything I had already done. Not all at once, but compare to what I started with to what I have now (which i'm still not completely satisfied with) it's completely different... but the bones are all still there. I dont think there any way I would have been able to come up with the current solution without first doing the just enough solution. **This** has been the most surprising aspect of this project for me... The sense of accomplishment and progress (dare I say _velocity_) has been so refreshing and the growing todo list isn't an overwhelming quagmire. Done is not necesarrily the same as finished, but it **is** usable and moves the project forward. 

# what is done?
This sort of "done" is impossible at the day job where everything is a discrete and seemingly disconnected 'project' that has an arbitrary begin and end. The end is important because that is where everything "stops" and is almost always driven by a date rather than a product goal. Well, not really since engineering is still on the hook for maintaining the code you were rushed into getting 'done' while the product team gets to move off onto their next idea. The dev team is stuck. 
A project at work is a fixed (they say it isnt fixed, but really it is) set of requirements that must be recorded, in complete detail, at the start of the project so you are able to give a clear "end" date (the word estimate is frequently used, but with a different definition than most people understand). Clearly a list of things is a good thing to have and this game is no exception. My todo list was based on what I _thought_ I wanted to build and features I _think_ I wanted to include. It started at ~20 items and now is somewhere around 100. I dont view this as a recipe, fixed blue print or binding contract. This is a rough sketch in the form of bullet points that changes day to day. Can you even put an end date on that? It's the difference between working towards a goal/vision and executing a predetermined solution. One feels like a journey, the other is a march. 

> As an aside, if each item continues to take  about a day or so - that's 100-200 days. Could even be a year once you consider not every day will be dedicated to this project and the list of todos continues to change. That's a daunting realization - but its ok. Everyday i finish one thing, and i've even begun showing it to people. Nothing is ever huge or super exciting - infact its usually much more underwhelming than it sounds.Its all baby steps, but it's continuous progress. 

Does this only feel like it works because it's my hobby project and has no real purpose? I dont want to belive that. I think this could be totally doable at work as well. THe big difference is that I have as much visibility into the goal of the whole as well as the parts. I can see the parts and how they fit together with other parts. I have understood the trade offs over the short term, because there _is_ a long term. I feel these are all the result of being driven by a product mindset rather than a project mindset. This is possible at work... maybe not my workplace.. but it's got to be possible somewhere ... right?

Every day people are constantly asking are you done. Not because they want to experiment or explore the new thing and see what options or dorrs have opened. Instead its usally because they have something else for you to do. The next thing usually doesnt even superceed the current thing and you end up juggling multiple things at once.


With this game project, there is no real "done" where im finished move onto something else. I realize this is partly because this is a hobby project...The product isnt done... the vision is still the same, but the path to the vision is shifting and evolving. Sure, I might get bored with this and move on to something else but that is my choice and the luxury of a hobby project. For now though everything is still super exciting, and evolving and I cant wait to see what comes out of this!




